From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
your show number 540. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Stephanie Hurlbert about creating a
new GPU texture compressor. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. And today I'm talking
with Stephanie Hurlbert, she's the
owner of binomial and she's
creating a new piece of
software, a GPU texture, transcoding,
a text, a texture compressor.
Is that correct? That is
correct. Yes. So there's a
market for this, right? Like
you were saying that not
only are you making a
texture compressor, but that you're
going to make the best
one, right? At least the
best one for a lot
of use cases that I'm
seeing. Yeah. So let's back
up. What is a GPU
lossy texture compressor. There's a
lot of words in there.
The GPU is your graphics
processing unit on a computer
because graphics are processed in
such a special way in
such a common use case
hardware developers created the GPU,
which is structured in such
a way that it's specialized
for drawing graphics. Lossy means
that it's okay to lose
a little bit of data.
If we can take a
photo of your cat and
make it really, really small
so that you can store
lots of photos of your
cat on your computer, it
might be worth it. If
it's not perfect image quality,
it's okay to lose a
little bit. And then texture
just refers to images, photos,
pieces of 2d artwork, any
any kind of image or,
or drawing that you can
save on your computer. And
then the compressor part of
course, is compressing it, making
that data smaller. Okay. So
if I go and open
up like Skyrim and I'm
walking around on a cobblestone
floor, is the texture, the
photographs or the drawings of
the art of that cobblestone?
Absolutely. So that, that cobblestone
floor, it's probably a tiled
texture, meaning it's a texture
that repeats itself over and
over. But if that texture
was too small, you would
notice the repeating and it
would look really bad. So
it's, it's beneficial for the
artist to make it as
detailed and as big as
possible. And that means that
you probably should compress it
a little bit to make
it easier to store. So
you can have lots of
different kinds of textures and
not a game would just
cobblestone floor Florida. And are
these things like big, like,
like three megapixel type photographs
or how what's a typical
texture size? I assume that
they have round numbers like
five 12 by five 12.
Absolutely. And it really depends
on games. A lot of
it actually, it goes outside
of games too, you know,
think about Google maps and
all the textures that are
needed for an application like
that, for instance, but a
typical game will have, you
know, you're right in that
it's five 12 or, you
know, one K two K
textures. Those are, those are
the common sizes that we
see it starting to become
more common to have four
K textures as well because
your, your screens are increasing
in resolution and people really
want to use that to
full advantage. Hang on now,
4k by 4k. That's like,
like, what is it? Three
megapixels, four megapixels. That's like
a photograph, right? That's okay.
Well, it's huge. It's huge.
And that is exactly why
that, and many other reasons
are why a lot of
people are looking at our
texture compressor and realizing, wait,
we really need to focus
on compression and getting the
best compressor we can to
give you an example. Basically,
a lot of GPS have
hardware decoding in them. So
what that means is memory
is very precious on a
GPU. You don't want to
store uncompressed textures on your
graphics processing unit. So what
they do is they store
it in a special GPU
format. We call these they're
different per GPU manufacturer. One
example is DXT and other
is PVR TC that you
can look up. And basically
if you store it in
that special texture format, you
can decode it using the
GPU hardware, which makes it
really fast. And it's stored
in a way that the
GP likes the problem with
that is that a format
like JPEG is a fourth
of the size of those
special GPU formats. So when
you think about, you know,
dealing with 4k or a
two K or one K
texture, if you have a
lot of them, a fourth
of the size makes a
huge difference. And we don't
want to unnecessarily store a
huge texture, even if it
can be easily decoded by
our GPU. And we're talking
about big things here. If
I understand correctly, like I
just downloaded while we were
talking a wallpaper that was
4k by 4k, it was
eight megabytes as a JPEG.
And I'm sure 50 or
60 as a bitmap, that's
massive. It's massive. And think
about it. It was eight
cans, a Jacob, a JPEG.
If we had stored it
in one of these GPU
formats, it would have been
four times that size. That's
crazy. That's not practical. That
seems like when we move
into 4k gaming, we're going
to hit a problem where
Blu-rays aren't big enough. Like
we're going to be looking
at a hundred gigabyte games.
And as you move around
these worlds, we're going to
be transferring that information, you
know, from the, the, the
solid state or the drive
into the computer. And then
up into the GPU memory
is going to be, there's
gonna be a lot of
memory being used up in
your GPU. Exactly. And I
mean, games, always games always
want to look as most
cutting edge as possible. And
a lot of that involves
taking advantage of high resolutions,
as well as using a
lot of detail. A lot
of new graphics techniques involve
storing other kinds of detail
and textures like say light
maps or normal maps or
specular maps, which are basically
extra textures that give you
detail that you may not
be able to deduce from
just the photograph. So textures
are on the rise and
what are our compressor and
transcoder does, is it compresses,
it compresses your image to
about the size of a
JPEG. So think about that.
Now it's a fourth of
the size and what it
does is on the CPU
before it sends it to
the GPU, it quickly really
quickly transcodes it into a
format that the GPU can
actually understand DXT, PBR, TC,
one of these formats. And
then you get to take
advantage of that really fast
decoding. So it basically allows
you to store these images
in a format that's much
smaller as well as transform
it to the format your
GP likes. So it's the
best of both worlds as
well, what we're trying to
achieve anyway. Okay. So let's
back up a moment. Cause
we've, we've talked with a
lot of words and a
lot of assumptions that maybe
the audience doesn't understand, and
maybe I'm a little confused.
So the creator of the
texture works in Photoshop and
whatever tools that they want
to make. Right. They, they
may take photographs, they may
render it, they may do
whatever, but they make a
source raw image of the
highest possible quality. Is that
right? Yeah, exactly. So the
artists, yeah, they, they make
their assets. So in your
couple of stone example, I
make a really beautiful cobblestone
floor that will later be
tiled into a game. What
I do if we used
our compressor is I would
use the compressor to compress
it into our special format,
the time of game creation
at the time of the
asset creation. So we do
this beforehand, just like you
would a JPEG, you know,
you store JPEGs on your
computer. JPEG is a compressed
format. Okay. So then I
saved that. I saved that
on my, in my, as
I am building my game.
It's part of the build
process, just like as a
blogger, I run, you know,
like tiny PNG or P
and G gauntlet to squish
my images before I upload
them a game maker goes
and runs your, your closed
source encoder, and then encodes
it in your format. What
do they do now before
the binomial system, before, you
know, Stephanie's machine, you know,
before Stephanie's creation, what did
they do? Ah, they can
use a number of methods
and it's really fascinating to
see the different hacks and
techniques that people have come
up with. So there, there
are a lot of game
studios that will save it
to something like a JPEG,
for instance, because that's really
small. We love that. And
they still understand the importance
of storing it in these
special GPU formats on the
GPU. So what they'll do
is they will save it
to JPEG and then they
will decompress it entirely on
the CPU. And then recompress
it to a J to
one of these GPU formats.
So that, that not only
will take them extra time
because you have to decompress
it and recompress it. But
it'll also add double artifacts,
JPEG introduces different artifacts than
these GPU formats do. And
so when you decompress it
and recompress it, you, you
lose even more detail than
you should are. What our
transcoder does in comparison is
takes the compressed format. And
transcodes it, which means there's
no decoding and Rayanne coding
stage. It turns it directly
into the compressed GPU format,
which is much better for
quality and speed And space,
right. And you eat the
same space that you had
with JPEG. Exactly, exactly. And
the other thing that I've
seen people do is they'll
just store it in the
GPU format from the start
and say, I guess I
will either try to compress
that with something like zip,
like, or just a compressor,
and then decompress it right
before I get to the
GPU and take whatever losses
that gives me, or I'll
just, I'll just accept the
fact that it's four times
the size. It should be
and apologize to my users
because at least it's in
directly in the format that
GPU will understand. And I
won't need to worry about
any decompression and recompression Is
decompression expensive or does it
depend on the, on the
kind of decompression? It definitely,
of course depends on the
kind of decompression you're dealing
with, but for this, for
this particular case, it is
more expensive than transcoding. For
instance, our transcoder is faster
than decompressing an image and
re compressing. It Is the
distinction there. When you say
transcoder like, when I think
decompress, like I read the
bits off the disc and
I explode them in, then
I put them back on
the disc and then I
say, Hey, there's the file
and temp space or whatever.
Is transcoding just decompressing into
memory? Or is it, is
it a more different definition?
It's an excellent question. So
when you, when you decompress
something, you, you basically, you
explode the bedside as you
say, but you also turn
it into an image that
you can actually see and
read on your computer when,
when you transcode, you transcode
it to another compressed format.
So imagine taking a JPEG
and turning it into a
PNG just directly, like it's,
it's, it's the process of
going from one compressed format
to another. I see, without
decompressing there, wasn't it didn't,
it didn't explode. And then
sit in memory is a
big buffer and then squish,
It was squished and we
just rearranged the bits so
that it's squished in a
different way now. No intermediate.
Okay. So to put it
into like techie layman terms,
I could, you know, unzip
a file. I can unzip
the zip and then use
RAR and RAR it up
again, but I'm gonna need
all that space in memory
and all of the churning
to go and do that
work. If I could just
tell the zip, make me
a RAR and it never
got exploded, that would provide
me all sorts of value
at churn, less on the
disk CPU works less. Everybody
wins. Exactly. That's actually a
perfect example. And let's, let's
imagine a case where RAR
was so much bigger than
the zip, but that's what
you needed to end up
with. So our case would
be like taking the zip,
which is this tiny format,
but not something usable in
the end and transcoding it
directly to that radar only
when it's needed, when it's
about to send to the
GPU, except not with zip
and RAR. So putting this
into like a topical terms,
did you see the Dropbox
announcement yesterday? I must've missed
it. I was out of
town yesterday. You must entertain
me with this announcement. So
let me see if I
understand this because you're the
expert. They came up with
a theme. We just released
an open source image, compression
format called leptons. So Dropbox
knows that we all have
JPEGs in our drop boxes,
so they will take, and
they will compress JPEGs and
they can compress them at
five megabytes a second, and
they can decode them back
into the original bits at
15 megabytes a second. So
basically they've made 22% savings
reductions for existing JPEGs. They've
gone through our Dropboxes squished
everything into their format called
leptons, but it's lossless. And
then when we request our
JPEGs, they stream decode it.
They transcode it back into
JPEG and we don't notice
the difference. Yes, yes. That's
so similar. The only differences
that the compressor that we're
making will be lossy, but
we hope that it will
be lossy in such a
way that it doesn't really
affect your quality in a
way that you'll notice, Right.
The way that modern J
pegging is like, if you
set your JPEG at 90,
you have to be a
photographer to notice that the
sky is, has artifacts. Exactly.
And what we determined is
that that lossiness is worth
it for the speed and
the compression that you get.
But I think it's amazing
that leptin is lossy and
transcodes and saves you so
much time and space. That's
really, that's really awesome of
them. I love seeing compressors
in this space. Yeah. It's
lossless and it's, and they're
doing it of course, to
save, to save money and
you're doing it to not
only make it better for
the gamer, make it better
for the developer, but in
such a way that it
sounds like it's just everybody
wins. There's no, it's just
a superior way. No one
loses in your scenario. Well,
and it's really fascinating to
me to think about it
beyond games too. Like I
got a call from someone
in the medical industry the
other day, who was saying
that this would really change
the healthcare industry in terms
of sending x-ray scans, CT
scans for prognosis videos, through
their network, all kinds of
things. So, I mean, think
about the, the amount of
ways that streaming image data
affects our lives through all
industries. It's extremely important to
try to do it right.
Well, have you thought of
that? I did that. No,
no. Someone reached out to
me directly. I was surprised
and I welcome. I welcome
input like that. Wow. Okay.
So let's dig a little
bit into how the GPS
work I hear about, you
know, a new GPU comes
out every six to nine
months, and then I read
on like a non to
tech, all these things I
don't understand. And suddenly we're
in a scenario where it
feels to me like the
video card, the $600 video,
your card you can buy
is as a good of
a CPU and a computer
as my computer is, it's
got four gigs of Ram
and it's got, you know,
eight processors is that card
that I put into my
desktop, as powerful as my
desktop. It is very powerful.
And what's fascinating about your
question is it's just powerful
in a different way. So
one of the easiest ways
to explain that is to
talk about multithreading and doing
things in parallel. So on,
on your CPU, you don't
have nearly amount as as
much ability to paralyze your
work as you do on
your GPU. However, there are
other advantages to your CPU.
You have a lot more
memory. It's, it's structured in
a way that's better for,
for certain processes. GP was
really good at doing simple
actions all at the same
time. And that makes sense,
right? Because when we process
graphics, we want to be
doing operations on all the
pixels in our screen. Seriously,
every pixel gets processed by
your graphics and we can't,
we can't do that on
four threads. Think about how
many pixels especially modern screens
have. So the GPU is
able to highly highly parallelized
those operations. The downside is
that as GPS have gotten
more powerful in some ways,
memory is still a big
concern for GPS. Everything still
starts on the CPU and
is sent over. And the
GPU is, is, is not
great at dealing with large
memory loads, which is partly
why I'm focusing on compression
and doing that very well
as is so important. Why
can't we just put 16
gigs of Ram on a
video card and load the
whole game in or 32
gigs isn't memory Cho cheap
now. I mean, they have
these giant fans and they've
got all these processors and
why not just throw, you
know, gigs and gigs of
memory at the problem. That's
actually, And extremely good question.
And it's up to the
GPU manufacturers. Maybe they should
work on making that a
bigger priority, but I, I
imagine I'm not a GPU
manufacturer, but I imagine that
there are a lot of
things to consider. For instance,
actually building memory into the
GPU might be harder than
harder than we think. And
the other amount is the
more memory you put, the
more you have to think
about, well, if I just
make all of this memory
equally, easily accessible, I'm going
to overall slow down my
memory access. You know, the
concept of caches, for instance,
I want some memory that's
really easily accessible, so they
would have to, as they
put more memory on a
GPU, they'd have to think
about those problems some more
and design it in a
way. So that memory access
is still really fast. It's,
it's a very complex issue,
but I actually, I agree
that more memory should be
on GPS and we should
be solving that problem as
well. Yeah. So there's this
new Nvidia card called a
10 80, which is, that's
like the one that we
all want, right. It was
like 600 bucks though, or
something it's ridiculous in the
list of all of the
huge numbers of things that
it has. It has 160
texture units. What does that
mean? That's a really good
question. Then I need to,
I need to dig into
the specs of the 10
80 and detail I haven't
yet, but I imagine those
are the units that I
was discussing that process texture
data in parallel. So it
allows, it allows that GPU
to be even more parallel
than the GPS that were
prior. Okay. So this is,
this is a logical unit
that, that you can, that
you use a texture mapping
unit for, for once you've
given it once you've decompressed
your texture, it's the thing
that rotates it and moves
it around and does stuff
with it. Right? Exactly. Exactly.
Okay. So then they will
take your, your trans coders
resulting textures and then spin
them around and do stuff
with them and then put
them on the floor. And
I walk on it. Okay.
It's really fascinating. It's this
might be a tidbit that
isn't isn't necessary, but GPS
work in a very tile
based approach. So what they
do is when I access
a pixel on your cobblestone
floor, for instance, I want
to turn that pixel yellow
because the sun is shining
on it. And it's really
important that dot cobblestone floor
reflects the sun in a
good way. So I would
grab the, but instead of
grabbing the entire image, I
would just grab a small
tile of the image to
work with. And that's one
of the things that these
GPU formats and GPU hardware
architecture is really good at.
And that helps with saving
memory is only accessing things
in tiles, instead of always
needing to grab the entire
image from memory. And now
your partner in crime here
at binomial is a, is
rich Goldrich Gilda. And is
the name, the name of
it is called, is crunch.
Is that correct? Yeah. So
he previously worked on a
free and open source library
to anyone can use now
called the crunch that essentially
does everything I've. Well, most
of the things I've been
telling you, our compressor will
do. Hasn't been actively maintained
and worked on for a
few years and we have
just been talking nonstop about
all kinds of ways to
improve it. And also the
fact that he only handles
certain GPU formats. For instance,
if you wanted to make
an iPhone game, you couldn't
use crunch because it doesn't
support that kind of GPU
format. So we were thinking
it's really important to get
this technology in the hands
of everyone. So if you're
not on a windows PC,
you can still use this
in your game. I think
that's extremely important. Okay. So
then your, your encoder will
take the formats that the
asset creator is making and
then hold them. And then
the transcoder will detect and
figure out, or be told
that you're on an Nvidia,
you're on an ATI, you're
on an iPhone, you're on
a Nvidia shield or whatever,
and do the right thing
is Exactly that's the basic
idea behind it. And that
that'll make it so that
you don't need to use
a text. It's not as
good if you're developing, it's
an iPhone game. This, this
really is for this particular
use case, you know, moving
texture data and displaying on
the GPU. I actually don't
know of a better solution.
And I don't, I don't
want people who develop on
different platforms to miss out
on it. So what's the,
what's the timeframe for this?
Is this something that's like
a like doom, it'll be
it'll, you'll release it when
it's done In general, but
we do have constraints right
now. We're a company that's
kind of bootstrapping ourselves and
funding ourselves with part time
contract work. We do VR
and AR consulting and graphics
consulting primarily focused on optimization.
Cause it's really similar to
this compressor work, but that
takes up time. So we're
thinking if we continue to
do part time contracts, maybe
we'll have an initial build
end of year early next,
but it depends on how
much time that takes. What
we're working on now is
if companies need it early,
or if people just want
to support development, we're taking
preorders and that'll allow us
to actually focus on this
and get it done sooner.
Very cool. So then people,
people who are listening right
now and they know that
someone is interested in a
technology like this can reach
out to binomial.info and get
in touch with you. Absolutely.
Absolutely. My email is Stephanie
binomial dye info. You can
email me anytime. Okay. So
if you don't mind, I
want to shift gears a
little bit and I want
to understand the kind of
software engineering that you do
juxtapose with the kind that
maybe I do, or maybe
our listeners do, because we
all consider ourselves programmers, coders,
hackers, engineers, but it seems
like, you know, in school,
you know, I hung a
left and you hung a
right, because this feels very
math, heavy, very, very, very
technical. Well, it makes me
feel like as someone who's
a web developer doing CSS
and doing HTML, like text
boxes over data, just isn't
simply a as hard a
problem is this, does this
mean that you have a
background in advanced math? What's
fascinating about that is that
rich and I work on
this together and we have
very different backgrounds. I started
school in mathematics. I wanted
to be a mathematician. So
math is definitely my thing.
I love it. But rich
doesn't does not have a
background in math at all
and has just kind of
picked it up as he
goes and focused on making
smart architecture decisions and, and
learning about algorithms and computer
science instead. So there are
many, there, there are many
routes you can go and
having mouth math is definitely
very helpful, but it's certainly
not something you can't, you
can't pick up as well.
And I actually encourage people
to not, not be discouraged
by a lack of math
background. Okay. So it is
not like impossible for someone
to shift gears. If I
wanted to switch out of
web it, you know, I
know I have a background
somewhat in algorithms and I
can a reasonable amount of
code smell. I can tell
when something smells bad. What
levels of math do I
need to understand to start
doing things in three D
space like this? That is
an extremely good question. And
I would say basics and
things like linear algebra are
very good because that's, that
is the mathematics and moving
things in space, for instance.
But that's, that's good advice
for three D graphics in
general, but I would actually
say, look up books. Like
I, I should look this
up after so I can
post it, but there, there
are many good books focused
around mathematics for game development,
but moreover I would not,
not go into the field
until you had a math
background. I would dive in
and start creating things because
the chances are, you can
build a lot of really,
really interesting things before having
a strong math background. Really
That's, that's very encouraging because
I, I can imagine that
there are people listening who
might say, well, shoot, you
know, I got to go
to the Khan Academy now
and I learned all about
real coordinate spaces. And then
that means three years from
now, I'll be a graphics
programmer you're saying start now
and do it all in
parallel. I would highly encourage
you to start now. For
instance, I got into the
field through open source and
free graphics engines like cinder
and openFrameworks and people who
use those graphics engines, which
are written in C plus
plus and open geo really
low level stuff are typically
artists. And it is so
inspiring to see them just
pick up these libraries. And
if they don't know math,
I'll Google it, but usually
they can still build some
really amazing things. And you
can see more examples of
artists using this kind of
low level of tech on
websites like GLSL sandbox or
shader toy. It's, it's definitely
something that I encourage everyone
to go into and you
don't need, you don't necessarily
need years of school to
pick up an example and
start playing with it. So
you were a mathematician, you
discovered open source software. And
did you pick up coding
or were you doing math
and computer science simultaneous. I
started at school studying mathematics
and I ended up switching
to computer science because I
became really interested in visualizing
my mathematics and building tools.
And I ended up going
into that way more than
doing mathematics research itself. And
then my first job out
of college was working at
an advertising firm that it
was advertising, but it really
kind of built art installations
around the companies we worked
for. For instance, they would
design lobbies that had very
interesting digital sculptures in there.
And while building those, we
had to get really low
level because they were the
types of art installations that
weren't done before. So we
had to make our own
tools and, and that required
picking up low level graphics.
You know, that gets me
thinking about what are the
most impressive things that I've
seen in the real world,
which is when they map
a projection onto an existing
building and then they'll make
it, make the building blow
up or whatever. Amazing it's,
it's fascinating. And it, to
me, one of the most
inspiring things and why I
like building graphics tools for
people is building a tool
for it, for an artist
that has never used math
or programming before, but who
has a very strong design
sense and a very strong
art background and seeing what
they're able to do with
this amazing new medium we
have. And that's why I'm
always encouraging of people to
try this out without needing
a strong math background or
a strong computer science. It's
likely you can still build
things. No. Are you a
gamer as well? Or are
you, you spend more time
thinking about math than you
do actually using product. I
spent a lot of time
thinking about math, but I
do love games very much
so. So you do, we
spend our time looking at
your code on binomial, LLC.
I know that you have
part of it open source
and part of it closed
source, right? You're going to
make the encoder closed and
that's how you'll make your
money. And then the encoder
will be open source and
everyone can learn from it.
Absolutely. So our transcoder will
be open source. The encoder
will be closed source, but
for now you can go
to binomial. LLC is get,
get hub and check out
crutch Rich's crunch library that
is entirely open source, including
the encoder. And it's a
great way to see, see
something similar to what we'll
be making. Very cool. Well,
I really appreciate your time
and thanks so much for
talking with me today. Nice
to meet you. Nice to
meet you too. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes and we'll see you
again next week.